
The kidneys are invariably called the workhorses of the body. Each day they process about 190 quarts of water—that is the amount a bath holds up to the overflow level—and 3.3 pounds of salt. They are startlingly small for the amount of work they do, weighing just five ounces each. They are not in the small of the back, as everyone thinks, but higher up, about at the bottom of the rib cage. The right kidney is always lower because it is pressed down upon by the asymmetrical liver. Filtering wastes is their principal function, but they also regulate blood chemistry, help maintain blood pressure, metabolize vitamin D, and maintain the vital balance between salt and water levels within the body. Eat too much salt and your kidneys filter out the excess from your blood and send it to the bladder so that you can pee it all away. Eat too little and the kidneys take it back from the urine before it leaves your body. The problem is that if you ask the kidneys to do too much filtering over too long a period, they get tired and don’t work so well. More than most other organs, the kidneys lose function as you age. Between the ages of forty and seventy, their filtration capacity drops by about 50 percent. Kidney stones become more common, as do more life-threatening illnesses. The death rate from chronic kidney disease has jumped by more than 70 percent since 1990 in the United States and by even more in some third world countries. Diabetes is the commonest cause of kidney failure, with obesity and high blood pressure as important contributory factors. What the kidneys don’t return to the body via the bloodstream, they pass on to the second and more familiar of our bladders, the urinary one, for disposal. Each kidney is connected to the bladder by a tube called a ureter. Unlike the other organs discussed here, the urinary bladder doesn’t produce hormones (at least none yet found) or have a role in body chemistry, but it does at least possess a kind of venerability. “Bladder” is one of the oldest words in the body, dating from Anglo-Saxon times and predating both “kidney” and “urine” by more than six hundred years. Most other words in Old English with a median d sound morphed into a softer th sound, so that “feder” became “feather” and “fader” became “father,” but “bladder” for some reason resisted the gravitational pull of common usage and has stayed true to its original pronunciation for well over a thousand years, something few other parts of the body could claim.

Bryson, Bill. The Body: A Guide for Occupants (pp. 188-189). Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. Kindle Edition. 